# Build your own: linker

By: [Andrew Halle](https://github.com/andrewhalle)
Repo: [byo-linker](https://github.com/andrewhalle/byo-linker)

Part of [build-your-own](https://github.com/andrewhalle/build-your-own)

## Parsing ELF Files

The first step of writing our linker will be parsing ELF files. We'll use `nom`
to easily parse ELF files into in-memory data structures, and along the way
we'll learn about what all goes into an ELF file. I'll closely mirror the
[System V ABI documentation](http://www.sco.com/developers/gabi/latest/contents.html)
in my sections.

### What is an ELF file?

An ELF file (stands for <u>E</u>xecutable and <u>L</u>inkable <u>F</u>ormat) is
a standard format for object files, shared libraries, and executables. In the
compilation pipeline, an ELF file is the output of the assembler, and both the
input and output of the linker. ELF files serve a few distinct purposes

 * contain the machine code that will form the running program
 * contain information for linking separately compiled object files together
 * contain information for building the process image

There are 3 main types of ELF file:

 1. *Relocatable files:* relocatable ELF files contain object code that is
    ready to be linked with other object files, static libraries (which are
    just archives of object files), and shared libraries. Relocatable files are
    not independently usable, as they need to be _relocated_ (we'll get to
    exactly what that means in a little bit).
 2. *Executable files:* executable ELF files contain executable code with no
    unresolved references. The bytes in an executable ELF file are directly
    loaded into memory by the operating system and executed.
 3. *Shared object files:* shared object ELF files contain position independent
    code that are loaded directly into memory at runtime. Executable ELF files
    which link with shared objects declare their dependency on the shared
    object file in their metadata, and rely on the dynamic linker (part of the
    operating system) to load the associated shared objects into memory at
    runtime.

### Setting up

We'll start by setting up a new Rust project.

```bash
cargo new linker
```

and filling `main.rs`.

```rust
use std::fs::File;
use std::io::Read;
use std::path::PathBuf;
use structopt::StructOpt;

use ld_rs::elf::ElfFile64;
use ld_rs::link;

#[derive(StructOpt, Debug)]
#[structopt(name = "basic")]
struct Opt {
    #[structopt(name = "FILE", parse(from_os_str))]
    filenames: Vec<PathBuf>,
}

fn generic_error(action: &str) -> ! {
    eprintln!("Something went wrong {} that file.", action);
    std::process::exit(1)
}

fn main() {
    let opt = Opt::from_args();

    let mut elfs = Vec::new();

    for f in opt.filenames.iter() {
        let mut buf = Vec::new();
        let mut file = File::open(f).unwrap_or_else(|_| generic_error("opening"));
        file.read_to_end(&mut buf)
            .unwrap_or_else(|_| generic_error("reading"));

        match ElfFile64::parse(&buf[..]) {
            Ok(elf) => {
                elfs.push(elf);
            }
            Err(_) => {
                eprintln!("That is not an ELF file!");
                std::process::exit(1);
            }
        };
    }

    let mut file = File::create("output.o").expect("could not create file");
    ElfFile64::write_out(link(elfs), &mut file).expect("could not write file");
}
```

First, I've used `structopt` to easily parse command-line options. The
arguments to the linker are a list of relocatable object files which we'll link
together into a new relocatable object file (our linker will do the equivalent
of `ld -r` it will produce an object file which still needs to be relocated).

In `main`, we first parse the command line arguments. Next, for each file
specified on the command line, we open it and parse an ELF file with
`ElfFile64::parse` (which we'll define shortly). Once we have our list of ELF
files, we link them together with `link` (see post [#3](XXX) of this series)
and write the result out to a new object file `output.o` (see post [#2](XXX) of
this series).

### ElfFile64

### The ELF Header

### String tables

### Symbol tables

### Relocations

### The result
